.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii oamd.1
.\"
.TH OAMD 1 "MAR 2012" Linux "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
oamd \- ITU-T Y.1731 maintenance entity end-point daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B oamd [-c
.I path to alternative configuration XML file
.B ]
.B [-m
.I path to alternative meg XML file
.B ]
.B [-x
.I server MEP, i.e., turn of the CCM sending.
.B ]
.B [-i
.I MIP.
.B ]
.B [-n
.I Put 0 for the timeout poll/select, i.e., no-block (only for test purposes)
.B ]
.B [-s select/poll
.I Switch between select, and poll (only for test purposes)
.B ]
.B ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B 
Primary function of Y.1731 OAM protocol is to provide fault detection
services for Ethernet networks, such as loss of connectivity, bit
errors, or timing deviations. Y.1731 pro-actively verifies the
connectivity by monitoring OAM messages coming from remote entities in
the network. Upon an error an alarm is raised.

Y.1731 can perform in-service and out-of-service tests in order to
diagnose the network. In-service tests can be used to verify the path
integrity and for the identification of the on-path forwarding
entities. Out-of-service tests can be used for tasks such as measuring
the throughput of an unloaded path

Y.1731 can measure the loss, one-way delay, two-way delay, delay
variation, and throughput.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP -c
Path to alternate configuration XML file.
.IP -m
Path to alternate MEG XML file.
.IP -x
server MEP, i.e., turn of the CCM sending.
.IP -i
MIP.
.IP -s
Switch between select, and poll.
.SH NOTE
The level of the debug printing and location can be changed in the
config.xml. More information about that in the configuration file.

.SH NOTE 
Use this only with dynamic setting set to off or to id in config

.SH BUGS
See details about the current bugs from the tracker in URL
https://vcs.hiit.fi/trac/GoodNet/

.SH AUTHOR
Samu Varjonen <samu dot varjonen at hiit dot fi>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR oamtool (1),
.BR oamping (1)
.BR oamtrace (1)
