.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii mepd.1
.\"
.TH OAMPING 1 "MAR 2012" Linux "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
oamping \- ITU-T Y.1731 stand-alone LBM pinger.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B oamping [--mac
.I MAC
.B ] 
.B [--mel
.I MEG level
.B ] 
.B [--count
.I Count
.B ] 
.B [--interval
.I Interval
.B ] 
.B [--iifindex
.I IF index
.B ] 

.SH DESCRIPTION
 
Primary function of Y.1731 OAM protocol is to provide fault detection
services for Ethernet networks, such as loss of connectivity, bit
errors, or timing deviations. Y.1731 pro-actively verifies the
connectivity by monitoring OAM messages coming from remote entities in
the network. Upon an error an alarm is raised.

Y.1731 can perform in-service and out-of-service tests in order to
diagnose the network. In-service tests can be used to verify the path
integrity and for the identification of the on-path forwarding
entities. Out-of-service tests can be used for tasks such as measuring
the throughput of an unloaded path

Y.1731 can measure the loss, one-way delay, two-way delay, delay
variation, and throughput.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "--mac"
MAC address of the target.
.IP "--mel"
MEL level of the target.
.IP "--count"
How many LBMs are we sending.
.IP "--interval" 
The sending interval in usec.
.IP "--iifindex" 
The IF index used for sending.

.SH EXAMPLE

.B oamping --mac 11:22:33:44:55:66 --mel 4 --count 10 --interval 3330

Would send ten LBMs to 11:22::33:44:55:66 on MEG level 4 in 3.33 ms intervals.

.SH NOTE
Remember the interval restrictions 3.33 ms, 1 ms, 10 ms,
etc. Although, the interval allows more fine grained intervals.

This program uses the extended p^2 algorithm to report on more than
2*3+3 observations. The quantiles estimated are MIN, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, MAX

.SH BUGS
See details about the current bugs from the tracker in URL
https://vcs.hiit.fi/trac/GoodNet/

.SH AUTHOR
Samu Varjonen <samu dot varjonen at hiit dot fi>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR oamd (1),
.BR oamtool (1)
.BR oamtrace (1)
