.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii mepd.1
.\"
.TH OAMPING 1 "MAR 2012" Linux "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
oamtrace \- ITU-T Y.1731 stand-alone LBM pinger.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B oamtrace [--mac
.I MAC
.B ] 
.B [--ttl
.I TTL
.B ] 
.B [--mel
.I MEG level
.B ] 
.B [--iifindex
.I IF index
.B ] 

.SH DESCRIPTION
 
Primary function of Y.1731 OAM protocol is to provide fault detection
services for Ethernet networks, such as loss of connectivity, bit
errors, or timing deviations. Y.1731 pro-actively verifies the
connectivity by monitoring OAM messages coming from remote entities in
the network. Upon an error an alarm is raised.

Y.1731 can perform in-service and out-of-service tests in order to
diagnose the network. In-service tests can be used to verify the path
integrity and for the identification of the on-path forwarding
entities. Out-of-service tests can be used for tasks such as measuring
the throughput of an unloaded path

Y.1731 can measure the loss, one-way delay, two-way delay, delay
variation, and throughput.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "--mac"
MAC address of the target.
.IP "--ttl"
TTL.
.IP "--mel"
MEL level of the target.
.IP "--iifindex" 
The IF index used for sending.

.SH EXAMPLE

.B oamping --mac 11:22:33:44:55:66 --ttl 5 --mel 7 --iifindex 2

Would send ten LTM toward 11:22::33:44:55:66 on with TTl of 5 on MEG
level 7.

.SH BUGS
See details about the current bugs from the tracker in URL
https://vcs.hiit.fi/trac/GoodNet/

.SH AUTHOR
Samu Varjonen <samu dot varjonen at hiit dot fi>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR oamd (1),
.BR oamtool (1)
.BR oamping (1)
