.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii mepd.1
.\"
.TH OAMTOOL 1 "MAR 2012" Linux "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
oamtool \- ITU-T Y.1731 maintenance entity end-point daemon control tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B oamtool [--lmm
.I MEP ID
.B ] 
.B [--dmm
.I MEP ID
.B ] 
.B [--1dm
.I MEP ID
.B ] 
.B [--ltm
.I MEP ID 
.B ] 
.B [--tst
.I MEP ID 
.B ] 
.B [--lck
.I MEP ID 
.B ] 
.B [--remote
.I MEP ID
.B ] 
.B [--show
.B ] 
.B [--count
.I Count
.B ] 
.B [--pattern
.I Pattern
.B ] 
.B [--octets
.I Octets
.B ] 
.B [--until
.B ] 
.B [--interval
.I Interval
.B ] 

.SH DESCRIPTION
 
Primary function of Y.1731 OAM protocol is to provide fault detection
services for Ethernet networks, such as loss of connectivity, bit
errors, or timing deviations. Y.1731 pro-actively verifies the
connectivity by monitoring OAM messages coming from remote entities in
the network. Upon an error an alarm is raised.

Y.1731 can perform in-service and out-of-service tests in order to
diagnose the network. In-service tests can be used to verify the path
integrity and for the identification of the on-path forwarding
entities. Out-of-service tests can be used for tasks such as measuring
the throughput of an unloaded path

Y.1731 can measure the loss, one-way delay, two-way delay, delay
variation, and throughput.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-lmm"
Start loss measurement from this node towards the given MEP ID.
.IP "--dmm"
Start the delay measurements towards MEP ID
.IP "--1dm"
Start the one-way delay measurements towards MEP ID
.IP "--ltm"
Start the link trace towards the MEP ID
.IP "--tst"
Send a test signal towards the MEP ID
.IP "--lck"
We are configured for out-of-service test send LCKs
.IP "--count"
How many messages are sent.
.IP "--pattern"
What pattern is used for the TST (1 = Zeroes and 2 = PRBS)
.IP "--octets"
How long the TST pattern will be in octets.
.IP "--until"
The sending of test messages is continuous "until" this control is sent
again. Please 
.B NOTE 
that this option usage overrides 
.I count
option. 
.IP "--interval"
What is the interval that the messages are sent.

.SH NOTE
Allowed values for the interval are 1 = 3,33ms, 2 = 10ms, 3 = 100ms, 4 = 1s, 5 = 10s, 6 = 1min, 7 = 10min, defaults to 1s.

For LCK only 4 and 6 are the allowed intervals.

Note that incorrect values for count and interval are defaulted. For
count incorrect value (!(positive integer)) will result in one sent
LBM and incorrect interval is substituted with one second interval.

.SH EXAMPLE

.B oamtool --lmm 2 --interval 4 --loop

Would continuously send the LMMs to MEP ID 2 with 1 second interval.

.B oamtool --lmm 2 --interval 4 --count 4

Would tell the daemon to send 4 LMMs to MEP ID 2 with 1 second interval.

.B oamtool --lmm 2 --interval 4

Would send LMMs to MEP ID 2 with 1 second intervals.

.SH BUGS
See details about the current bugs from the tracker in URL
https://vcs.hiit.fi/trac/GoodNet/

.SH AUTHOR
Samu Varjonen <samu dot varjonen at hiit dot fi>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR oamd (1),
.BR oamping (1)
.BR oamtrace (1)
